
UNDP, has partnered with the Indian State of Telangana for Data in Climate Resilient Agriculture (DiCRA), a digital solution for strengthening food systems and food security by harnessing open-source technologies. For the DiCRA platform, UNDP wants a geospatial crop type map for Telangana that shows different crops growing in different farmlands in Telangana. India lacks open source, georeferenced survey data on farms that contains location information of farms and the crops grown on it. For generating crop type maps, such ground truth data is used.

Lack of such ground-truth, as in the case of Indian states, makes it challenging to not only develop crop type maps but also developing it for multiple crops. Therefore our project goal was to develop a proof of concept focussing on the identification of paddy in Telangana and to provide recommendations to UNDP on approaching this problem from here on.

Paddy’s unique growth pattern allows it to be modelled using VH polarization value obtained from satellite data. We implemented a paddy mapping technique and generated a geospatial map for the same. We also performed an unsupervised clustering for identifying paddy fields using scientific indices associated with the growth pattern of paddy.

With our work we concluded that ground truth data is necessary for generating a crop type map. If data is sparse then it can be used for validation of the taken approaches, VH polarization method for paddy in this project. Sparse data can also aid in more accurate clustering of crops for unsupervised learning. If ground truth data is abundant then it may be utilised for building models with much better accuracy than aforementioned appraoches. Be it any approach ground truth data is necessary to atleast validate the obtained results.

In light of the lack of ground truth data and difficulty in obtaining it, we recommend that effort should be focussed on pattern analysis of one crop at a time by building models that utilise the unique growing patterns of each crop. For this a domain expert in agriculture and remote sensing can work with data scientists by sharing information on crop growth patterns and relevant remote sensing datafeatures that can be used to model these patterns. A data scientist can then leverage this domain knowledge for implementing data pipelines and building pattern recognition models that can perform crop identification.
